Introduces 42I80 invalid grouping element (#508)
neo4j/docs-status-codes: modules/ROOT/pages/errors/gql-errors/42I80.adoc

= 42I80

== Status description

> error: syntax error or access rule violation - invalid grouping element. The grouping element '{ <<expr>> }' is not a valid grouping key. { <<cause>> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
error: syntax error or access rule violation - invalid grouping element. The grouping element `{ <<expr>> }` is not a valid grouping key. `{ <<cause>> }`
```

Author: The cause is a string such as 

A grouping element that references the projection item alias `a` must be a simple variable reference.

Reviewer: We still need the backticks here. Otherwise, it renders funny. We use backticks only for documentation purposes; you don't need to add them to the code.

Author: Ah! I see, sorry. I'll add them!

== Explanation
A grouping element that references a projection item alias (a name introduced by a return item of the same `WITH` or `RETURN` clause) must reference it as a simple variable — the bare alias on its own.
A non-simple reference to an alias, such as a property access, a function call, or an arithmetic expression, is not a valid grouping element.
A grouping element can also never reference an aggregation result, since an aggregation is computed per group and cannot itself be a grouping key.

> == Example scenario

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Example scenarios

Let's take the following example scenarios:

```

> 

Reviewer: Can we add a heading to each example? This will make them more visible.

```suggestion
=== Some heading
```

Try projecting `b AS a`, so that `a` is a projection item alias that shadows the incoming `a`, and then grouping by `a.p` — a property access on that alias:

[source,cypher]
----
UNWIND [{a: {p: 1}, b: 20}, {a: {p: 2}, b: 10}] AS row
WITH row.a AS a, row.b AS b
RETURN b AS a, count(*) AS cnt
  GROUP BY a.p;
----

Because `a` is a projection item alias, the only valid way to group by it is the simple reference `a`; the property access `a.p` is not a valid grouping element.
The query returns an error with GQLSTATUS 42I80 and status description:

.GQLSTATUS error
[source, error]
----
42I80: syntax error or access rule violation - invalid grouping element. The grouping element 'a.p' is not a valid grouping key. A grouping element that references the projection item alias `a` must be a simple variable reference.
----

> A second form of this error occurs when a grouping element references an aggregation result. Try grouping by the aggregation alias `cnt`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
===  Grouping element references an aggregation result

Try grouping by the aggregation alias `cnt`:
```

[source,cypher]
----
UNWIND [{a: 1}, {a: 2}] AS row
WITH row.a AS a
RETURN a, count(*) AS cnt
  GROUP BY a, cnt;
----

The query returns an error with GQLSTATUS 42I80 and status description:

.GQLSTATUS error
[source, error]
----
42I80: syntax error or access rule violation - invalid grouping element. The grouping element 'cnt' is not a valid grouping key. A grouping element cannot reference the aggregation `cnt`.
----

== Possible solutions

> To resolve the first example, the preferred way is to reference the alias as a simple variable:

Reviewer: This can go to the first example.

.Group by the alias as a simple variable
[source, cypher]
----
UNWIND [{a: {p: 1}, b: 20}, {a: {p: 2}, b: 10}] AS row
WITH row.a AS a, row.b AS b
RETURN b AS a, count(*) AS cnt
  GROUP BY a;
----

To group on the incoming value, rename the projection item so it no longer shadows the incoming variable, then group by that expression:

.Avoid shadowing the incoming variable
[source, cypher]
----
UNWIND [{a: {p: 1}, b: 20}, {a: {p: 2}, b: 10}] AS row
WITH row.a AS a, row.b AS b
RETURN b AS bb, count(*) AS cnt
  GROUP BY a.p;
----

> For the second example, remove the aggregation result from the grouping elements:

Reviewer: This one can be moved to the second example.

= 42I80

== Status description

> error: syntax error or access rule violation - invalid grouping element. The grouping element `{ <<expr>> }` is not a valid grouping key. { <<cause>> }

Author: ```suggestion
error: syntax error or access rule violation - invalid grouping element. The grouping element `{ <<expr>> }` is not a valid grouping key. `{ <<cause>> }`
```

== Explanation

> A grouping element that references a projection item alias (a name introduced by a return item of the same `WITH` or `RETURN` clause) must reference it as a simple variable — the bare alias on its own.

Reviewer: I saw this term "alias" in [22NC8](https://github.com/neo4j/docs-status-codes/blob/dev/modules/ROOT/pages/errors/gql-errors/22NC8.adoc?plain=1) as well. 
Aren't these called "variables" (see https://neo4j.com/docs/cypher-manual/current/queries/concepts/#core-concepts-nodes)?

Reviewer: What is an alias, what is a variable, and what is a projection item? I am confused.

Reviewer 2: **Some background**

`WITH` and `RETURN` are projection clauses. The fundamental operation they perform on the driving table is a relational projection. Hence, both clauses are very similar and their projection is subject to the same rules. 

When we talk about these rules, the distinction between `WITH` and `RETURN` is mostly irrelevant. Consequently, the language used abstracts form the distinction between `WITH` and `RETURN`. And so do most of the error code related to the projection clauses. 

**Brief explainer**

In 
```
MATCH (a)
WITH a AS b
RETURN b.prop AS c
```

- `a` is a variable, declared in `MATCH (a)`
- `a AS b` and `b.prop AS c` are projection items (or a return item) of the form `<expression> AS <alias>`, i.e.
  - in the projection item `a AS b`, `b` is the alias
  - in the projection item `b.prop AS c`, `c` is the alias
- depending on where the projection happens an alias either becomes a column in the result or a variable, i.e. in `RETURN b.prop AS c`
  - `b` is a variable originating from the alias `b` in `WITH a AS b`
  - `c` is the alias that becomes the column `c` in the query result

**On "alias" specifically**

"Alias" is not a term Joel made up, but it used and understood in the Cypher team at least as long as I work here. In code, the it goes as far back as the [git history allows](https://github.com/neo-technology/neo4j/blob/9bd6853864f952ff4a0ccf97ec2651d22458595f/public/community/cypher/front-end/ast/src/main/scala/org/neo4j/cypher/internal/v3_5/ast/ReturnItem.scala#L104). Calling the thing after `AS` [isn't a Cypher invention either.](https://www.w3schools.com/sql/sql_alias.asp). The term projection also originates from SQL land or more precisely [relational algebra](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Projection_(relational_algebra)), which borrowed it from [set theory](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Projection_(set_theory)).

The documentation opted for avoiding the term alias (and projection) in [`WITH`](https://neo4j.com/docs/cypher-manual/current/clauses/with/) and [`RETURN`](https://neo4j.com/docs/cypher-manual/current/clauses/return/). But uses it in the [`YIELD`](https://neo4j.com/docs/operations-manual/2026.05/procedures/call-procedures/#using-yield) documentation, which has a sentence "`propertyKey` is aliased as `prop`" when talking about `YIELD propertyKey AS prop`. It also already shows up in the status code doc, e.g on [42N21](https://neo4j.com/docs/status-codes/current/errors/gql-errors/42N21/).

**Normal Cypher documentation vs. status code documentation**

The documentation of `WITH` and `RETURN` also avoids all the weird and odd things users can do and sometimes end up doing. Most examples are essentially trivial. I understand that this is on purpose and I do not mind it at all. However, a (positive) consequence is that the documentation of `WITH` and `RETURN` can use a much simpler language as it only talks about the simple cases.

The status code documentation is necessarily ofter about the weird and odd cases. So, I think it is unfair to expect that the status code documentation can get away with the same simple language that the documentation of `WITH` and `RETURN` is using.

That does not mean the language can be made simpler than the PR currently has it. 

**Some suggestion**

```
A grouping element that contains an alias (a variable introduced by the same `WITH` or `RETURN` clause) must consist only of the alias. 

A non-simple grouping element, such as a property access, a function call, or an arithmetic expression can not contain an alias.
A grouping element can also never contain an aggregation result, since an aggregation is computed per group and cannot itself be a grouping key.
```

Reviewer: Hey @hvub, thank you so much for the thorough explanation.

> A grouping element that references a projection item alias (a name introduced by a return item of the same `WITH` or `RETURN` clause) must reference it as a simple variable — the bare alias on its own.

Reviewer: How about rewording these to:
``` suggestion
The `GROUP BY` clause is used to group the results of a query by one or more expressions.
Each expression in the `GROUP BY` clause is called a grouping element.

* A grouping element may reference an alias introduced by the same `WITH` or `RETURN` clause only if the grouping element is exactly that alias.
```

Author: I would say `of a clause` as there can be multiple `GROUP BY` clauses per query.

> A non-simple reference to an alias, such as a property access, a function call, or an arithmetic expression, is not a valid grouping element.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A non-simple grouping element, such as a property access, a function call, or an arithmetic expression, cannot contain an alias.
```

> A grouping element can also never reference an aggregation result, since an aggregation is computed per group and cannot itself be a grouping key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A grouping element cannot contain an aggregation result, since aggregations are computed per group and cannot be grouping keys.
```

== Example scenarios

Let's take the following example scenarios:

=== Invalid grouping on projection item alias

Try projecting `b AS a`, so that `a` is a projection item alias that shadows the incoming `a`, and then grouping by `a.p` — a property access on that alias:

[source,cypher]
----
UNWIND [{a: {p: 1}, b: 20}, {a: {p: 2}, b: 10}] AS row
WITH row.a AS a, row.b AS b
RETURN b AS a, count(*) AS cnt
  GROUP BY a.p;
----

Because `a` is a projection item alias, the only valid way to group by it is the simple reference `a`; the property access `a.p` is not a valid grouping element.
The query returns an error with GQLSTATUS 42I80 and status description:

.GQLSTATUS error
[source, error]
----
42I80: syntax error or access rule violation - invalid grouping element. The grouping element 'a.p' is not a valid grouping key. A grouping element that references the projection item alias `a` must be a simple variable reference.
----

> ==== Possible solutions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> To resolve the first example, the preferred way is to reference the alias as a simple variable:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To fix the query, the preferred way is to reference the alias as a simple variable:
```

.Group by the alias as a simple variable
[source, cypher]
----
UNWIND [{a: {p: 1}, b: 20}, {a: {p: 2}, b: 10}] AS row
WITH row.a AS a, row.b AS b
RETURN b AS a, count(*) AS cnt
  GROUP BY a;
----

To group on the incoming value, rename the projection item so it no longer shadows the incoming variable, then group by that expression:

.Avoid shadowing the incoming variable
[source, cypher]
----
UNWIND [{a: {p: 1}, b: 20}, {a: {p: 2}, b: 10}] AS row
WITH row.a AS a, row.b AS b
RETURN b AS bb, count(*) AS cnt
  GROUP BY a.p;
----

===  Grouping element references an aggregation result

Try grouping by the aggregation alias `cnt`:

[source,cypher]
----
UNWIND [{a: 1}, {a: 2}] AS row
WITH row.a AS a
RETURN a, count(*) AS cnt
  GROUP BY a, cnt;
----

The query returns an error with GQLSTATUS 42I80 and status description:

.GQLSTATUS error
[source, error]
----
42I80: syntax error or access rule violation - invalid grouping element. The grouping element 'cnt' is not a valid grouping key. A grouping element cannot reference the aggregation `cnt`.
----

> ==== Possible solutions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

= 42I80

== Status description
error: syntax error or access rule violation - invalid grouping element. The grouping element `{ <<expr>> }` is not a valid grouping key. `{ <<cause>> }`

== Explanation

> The `GROUP BY` clause is used to group the results of a query by one or more expressions.

Author: ```suggestion
The `GROUP BY` clause is used to group the results of a clause by one or more expressions.
```
